The Young Siren
Tongan legend states that 2000 years ago The Great Mother, Fili’alua, feel into a deep and dark 
depression. Her husband the chief was a wicked man, and although he commanded great power and 
respect across the land, held a cruel and vengeful spirit. Every day he would leave the day’s proceedings 
and berate each of his many wives. Spewing hot venom at each one of them for ill-perceived wrongs. Of 
all his hate and ire, no one caught more of it than Fili’alua. She especially, the youngest and most 
beautiful, was the target of his tirades, and often shrank into the corner of the meeting house. Of all the 
chiefs spouses her fair skin and flowing black hair was found envious, and thus was deemed too stupid 
and carefree. Throughout all the years of her ill-fated marriage, she would slide into bed each night and 
cry herself to sleep, each tear silently absorbed by the woven reed matt below.
Because of her great sadness, Fili’alua refused to touch the chief and, despite the growing anger 
of his tirades, would rather give her life than to engage in any marital relations. This angered the chief so 
that after two years, he found himself inconsolable, and banished her from the great long house. 
Saddened, and unsure of what to do, she walked to the very edge of highest bluff and sat her legs over 
the cliff. There, unbecome by her sadness, she would weep over the edge while her tears fell into the 
sea below.
After sitting on the bluff for three days and nights, Fili’alua felt a presence stir behind her. It was 
The Great Father, Fili’aloa. He, then unacquainted with the crying princess, had sought her out hearing 
spreading rumors of the beautiful banished maiden. Offering to dry her tears, he sat down on the bluff 
beside her, and speaking softly with her for hours, encouraged her to eat homemade taro cakes to 
restore her strength. Overwhelmed by his kindness, Fili’alua soon felt relieved, and felt the sadness 
created by her husband fade away into the rushing western wind.
Within time the two fell in love, and together dissatisfied with their former lives decided to build 
a home there on the bluff. Around the completion of their new home Fili’olua had forgotten her past 
entirely, and with the blessing of a new and happy life fell pregnant. The ancient couple was overjoyed, 
and in their happiness celebrated with sweet desserts made of coconut and reed grass. 
While the young couple rejoiced, the Evil Chiefs spies quietly surveilled the former princess’s 
home and plotted against her. Although the chief was aware where his wife had taken residence, and 
had avoided scandal from her association with the unmarried Fili’aloa, it remained that she was still his 
wife, and the idea of a child born out of wedlock was simply unacceptable for the legitimacy of his reign. 
Thus, he schemed that once the child was born, he would execute both the newborn, and its 
unsuspecting parents. 
After 9 months time, The Great Father had learned of this plot from the other villagers who 
would occasionally visit their home. He, though worried for the health of their unborn, was unafraid, 
and decided he would face the chief himself in any conflict. Within time Fili’alua gave birth, and gazing 
upon the shining green eyes of her newborn named the child, Fili’oana, beautiful moon. Upon the news 
of the successful birth of the baby girl, the chief sent his men to first apprehend The Great Father, 
Fili’aloa. He, sensing their presence outside their hut. Urged his love and child to escape out the back 
door.

The Great Mother ran like the wind. Successfully evading the Chief’s men, she stole through a 
nearby thicket and trekked once again, this time with her bright newborn, across all of Tonga. Feeding 
Fili’oana with whatever milk she could muster, they soon reached the other edge of the island, and with 
great longing stared at the great lapping water on the sandy shore below. She, knowing that escape 
would be impossible, felt no choice but to part with her beautiful newborn. Thus, Fili’alua removed her 
sandals and slowly tread into the rising surf of the ocean.
Within the cascading tide, she stared at her beautiful daughter for the last time. Overcome by 
grief, she could not help but sob tears of pure agony as she lowered the child into the bright crystal 
water below. There, as her tears flowed over the child and into the ocean, the great spirits took pity on 
her, and before her red, beaded eyes a great magic occurred. Fili’alua released her child into the surf, 
and there, as her mother’s tears convalesced around the baby’s small palm leaf wrappings, and offered 
her an ancient spell of protection, once who’s powers have not been seen then or since. 
Thus, as the tragic young child floated off into the eastern current, she was completely unaware 
of her very mother being apprehended by the chief’s men on the shore and being violently executed for 
refusing to reveal the location of her newborn. So goes the story of The Great Mother.
Today, many wonder what may have happened to the forlorn child. Some say the gods drifted 
her small bundle across the ocean into the land of the spirits itself. Others say she was discovered by a 
band of rivaling warriors, who would raise the child and one day take vengeance on her mother’s killers. 
Nonetheless, enquiring minds know what actually happened to The Sea Child, Fili’oana. 
It remains that due to the blessing of her mother’s tears, Fili’oana gained the ability to breath in 
the very sea itself and thus, after growing to a young and tender age, swam deep into the shore to avoid 
ever being discovered by the angry chief or his men. Many say that she still lurks there, waiting in the 
deep, herself crying over the souls of her lost mother and father. It is said she will never leave, for the 
fear of her mother’s fate keeps her trapped below the surface for all time.
Seaweed in her Hair
